Add release notes for Metals 0.11.0 (#3493)
scalameta/metals: website/blog/2022-01-11-aluminium.md

    <td align="center">313</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Merged PRs</td>
    <td align="center">129</td>
  </tr>
    <tr>
    <td>Contributors</td>
    <td align="center">11</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Closed issues</td>
    <td align="center"></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>New features</td>
    <td align="center">10</td>
  </tr>
</tbody>
</table>

For full details: https://github.com/scalameta/metals/milestone/<num>?closed=1

Metals is a language server for Scala that works with VS Code, Vim, Emacs,
Sublime Text and Eclipse. Metals is developed at the
[Scala Center](https://scala.epfl.ch/) and [VirtusLab](https://virtuslab.com)
with the help from [Lunatech](https://lunatech.com) along with contributors from
the community.

## TL;DR

Check out [https://scalameta.org/metals/](https://scalameta.org/metals/), and
give Metals a try!

- Add CFR class file viewer.
- [Scala 3] Show type on hover.
- Simplify usage of sbt server.
- Better support for mill BSP.
- Extract value code action.
- Add command to run current file.
- Support test explorer API.
- Add go to definition via links for synthetic decorations.
- Basic Java support.
- Add support for Scala 2.13.8

## Add CFR class file viewer

> TODO

Reviewer: The Source file analyzer functionality has been expanded to include Lee Benfield's [CFR (Class File Reader)](https://www.benf.org/other/cfr/faq.html).

CFR decompiles class files to java, which is much more readable than using `javap`.

Author: Thanks! Modified it a bit.

## [Scala 3] Show type on hover

TODO

## Simplify usage of sbt server

> TODO

Reviewer 2: Previously if you wanted to use sbt as your build server instead of the default Bloop you'd need to ensure a `.bsp/sbt.json` file existed _before_ you tried to switch your build server. We originally created the `metals.generate-bsp` command for this, but realized this potentially forced extra steps on the user. To make this simpler, now even if no BSP entry exists for sbt and you attempt to switch your build server to sbt via the `metals.bsp-switch` command, we'll either use the existing `.bsp/sbt.json` file if one exists or automatically generate it (needs at least sbt 1.4.1) for you and then switch to it.

Author: Thanks!

## Better support for mill BSP

> TODO

Reviewer 2: Recently [Mill](https://github.com/com-lihaoyi/mill) has complete revamped their BSP implementation allowing for a much better experience for Metals users. Just like sbt, you can now use the `metals.bsp-switch` command to use Mill as your BSP server (needs at least Mill 0.10.0-M4). Keep in mine that the BSP support in Mill is still a work-in-progress. If you are interested in Mill BSP and you're a Metals user, feel free to include your input [here](https://github.com/com-lihaoyi/mill/issues/1546) as they are requesting feedback on improving the experience.

## Extract value code action

TODO

## Add command to run current file

TODO

## Support test explorer API.

Metals 0.11.0 implements Visual Studio Code's Testing API. According to the
[documentation](https://code.visualstudio.com/api/extension-guides/testing):

_The Testing API allows Visual Studio Code extensions to discover tests in the
workspace and publish results. Users can execute tests in the Test Explorer view
and from decorations. With these new APIs, Visual Studio Code supports richer
displays of outputs and diffs than was previously possible._

Test Explorer UI is a new default way to run/debug test suites and replaces Code
Lenses. The new UI adds a testing view, which shows all test suites declared in

> project's modules. From this panel there is also possible to run/debug test or

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
project's modules. From this panel it's also possible to run/debug test or
```

to navigate to test's definition.

Code Lenses are still the default in other editors and can be brought back by
setting `"metals.testUserInterface": "Code Lenses"`

## Go to definition via links for synthetic decorations.

TODO

## Basic Java support

Thanks to the the effort led by [Arthurm1](https://github.com/Arthurm1) Metals
now supports a subset of features for Java files and even Java only build

> targets. The currently biggest missing piece is interactive compiler that would

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
targets. Currently the biggest missing piece is an interactive compiler that would
```

---
author: Tomasz Godzik
title: Metals v0.11.0 - Aluminium
authorURL: https://twitter.com/TomekGodzik
authorImageURL: https://github.com/tgodzik.png
---

We're happy to announce the release of Metals v0.11.0! Due to the number of
changes in this release we decided to introduce one more minor version before
Metals 1.0.0, which is planned to come this year.

<table>
<tbody>
  <tr>
    <td>Commits since last release</td>
    <td align="center">336</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Merged PRs</td>
    <td align="center">136</td>
  </tr>
    <tr>
    <td>Contributors</td>
    <td align="center">11</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Closed issues</td>

>     <td align="center"></td>

Reviewer 2: I'm assuming this isn't supposed to be empty?

Author: I am adding the count now, good catch!

Author: Fixed

with the help from [Lunatech](https://lunatech.com) along with contributors from
the community.

## TL;DR

Check out [https://scalameta.org/metals/](https://scalameta.org/metals/), and
give Metals a try!

- Add CFR class file viewer.
- [Scala 3] Type annotations on code selection.
- Simplify usage of sbt server.
- Better support for mill BSP.
- Extract value code action.
- Add command to run current file.
- Support test explorer API.
- Add go to definition via links for synthetic decorations.
- Basic Java support.
- Add support for Scala 2.13.8
- Reworked Metals Doctor

## Add CFR class file viewer

In addition to the recently added semanticdb, tasty and javap functionalities,
thanks to the efforts of [Arthurm1](https://github.com/Arthurm1), it's now
possible to decompile class files using Lee Benfield's
[CFR (Class File Reader)](https://www.benf.org/other/cfr/faq.html).

CFR decompiles class files to java, which is much more readable than using
`javap`.

![cfr](https://i.imgur.com/exDFGyT.gif)

In the future this might help in go to definition for jars that do not have a
corresponding source jar, which is what Metals uses today.

> Editors support: Any editor that exposes the command.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Editor support: Any editor that exposes the command.
```

Author: Checked and seems you are right, though emacs is not far behind.

Author: Fxied!

## [Scala 3] Type annotations on code selection

In one of the last releases
[v0.10.8](https://scalameta.org/metals/blog/2021/10/26/tungsten#type-annotations-on-code-selection)

> we add the ability to inspect the type of an expression that is currently

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
we added the ability to inspect the type of an expression that is currently
```

selected. We are happy to announce that this functionality is now also available
for Scala 3, which is thanks to the continued effort of the team to bring the
users the best Scala 3 experience possible.

> Editors support: VS Code, nvim-metals, Sublime Text

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Editor support: VS Code, nvim-metals, Sublime Text
```

## Simplify usage of sbt server

Previously if you wanted to use sbt as your build server instead of the default
Bloop you'd need to ensure a .bsp/sbt.json file existed before you tried to
switch your build server. We originally created the metals.generate-bsp command
for this, but realized this potentially forced extra steps on the user. To make
this simpler, now even if no BSP entry exists for sbt and you attempt to switch
your build server to sbt via the metals.bsp-switch command, we'll either use the
existing .bsp/sbt.json file if one exists or automatically generate it (needs at
least sbt 1.4.1) for you and then switch to it.

Editors support: Any editor that exposes the command.

## Better support for mill BSP

Recently [Mill](https://github.com/com-lihaoyi/mill) has complete revamped their
BSP implementation allowing for a much better experience for Metals users. Just
like sbt, you can now use the `metals.bsp-switch` command to use Mill as your

> BSP server (needs at least Mill 0.10.0-M4). Keep in mine that the BSP support in

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
BSP server (needs at least Mill 0.10.0-M4). Keep in mind that the BSP support in
```

Mill is still a work-in-progress. If you are interested in Mill BSP and you're a
Metals user, feel free to include your input
[here](https://github.com/com-lihaoyi/mill/issues/1546) as they are requesting
feedback on improving the experience.

> Editors support: Any editor that exposes the command.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Editor support: Any editor that exposes the command.
```

## Extract value code action

In this release we introduce a new code action that allows users to
automatically extract method parameter to a separate value.

For example in a invocation such as:

```scala
@main
def main(name: String) =
  println("Hello " + name + "!")
```

when user invokes the new code action they will see:

```scala
@main
def main(name: String) =
  val newValue = "Hello " + name + "!"
  println(newValue)
```

This should work correctly for both Scala 2 and Scala 3, in which case it will
try to maintain your coding style even if a block is needed.

> One important limitations is that this new code action doesn't allow extracting

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One important limitation is that this new code action doesn't allow extracting
```

lambdas or partial functions, as this has the potential of breaking your code.

Currently, this works only in method parameters and Metals will try to choose
the exact parameter to extract even if there is a number of nested ones. This
will most likely be improved in the future to also be used in other places such
as if conditions or to allow users to choose the exact parameter they want to
extract.

> Editors support: All

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Editor support: All
```

## Add command to run current file

Based on the work of [ckipp01](https://github.com/ckipp01) in one of the
[previous releases](https://scalameta.org/metals/blog/2021/04/06/tungsten/#smoother-main-and-test-discovery)
it's now possible to invoke a command to run anything in the current file. This
means that if we use this new command anything that is located within the
currently focused file, whether it's tests or a main class, will be properly
discovered and run.

In Visual Studio Code this replaces the previously default config generation and
now if no `launch.json` is specified in the workspace, any file can be run using
the default run command (`F5`).

> Editors support: Any editor that supports DAP

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Editor support: Any editor that supports DAP
```

## Support test explorer API.

Metals 0.11.0 implements Visual Studio Code's Testing API. According to the
[documentation](https://code.visualstudio.com/api/extension-guides/testing):

_The Testing API allows Visual Studio Code extensions to discover tests in the
workspace and publish results. Users can execute tests in the Test Explorer view
and from decorations. With these new APIs, Visual Studio Code supports richer
displays of outputs and diffs than was previously possible._

Test Explorer UI is a new default way to run/debug test suites and replaces Code
Lenses. The new UI adds a testing view, which shows all test suites declared in
project's modules. From this panel it's also possible to run/debug test or to
navigate to test's definition.

<!-- ![test-explorer](https://i.imgur.com/VLYwqRn.gif) -->

Code Lenses are still the default in other editors and can be brought back by
setting `"metals.testUserInterface": "Code Lenses"`

> Editors support: Visual Studio Code

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Editor support: Visual Studio Code
```

## Go to definition via links for synthetic decorations.

Since
[Metals v0.9.6](https://scalameta.org/metals/blog/2020/11/20/lithium/#show-implicit-conversions-and-classes)
it's possible to show additional information about sythetic code that is being
generated by the compiler. This includes implicit parameters, classes and
conversions. It wasn't however possible to find their definitions. This
limitation was mostly due to the lack of proper UI options in different editors.

Recently, we've managed to work around it by using command links that can be
rendered in the hover and will bring the user to the right definition.

![synthetic-def](https://i.imgur.com/YyHVmLX.gif)

> Editors support: Visual Studio Code, Sublime Text

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Editor support: Visual Studio Code, Sublime Text
```

## Basic Java support

Thanks to the the effort led by [Arthurm1](https://github.com/Arthurm1) Metals
now supports a subset of features for Java files and even Java only build
targets. Currently the biggest missing piece is interactive compiler that would
allow us to properly support features such as completions, hover or signature
help.

This was possible thanks to using the Java semanticdb plugin included in
[lsif Java project](https://github.com/sourcegraph/lsif-java) from
[sourcegraph](https://about.sourcegraph.com/) and especially the work by
[olafurpg](https://github.com/olafurpg).

The support includes:

- formatting
- code folding
- go to definition
- references
- go to implementation
- rename
- run/debug code lense for Java main classes

These functionalities will also now work thanks to

> [dos65](https://github.com/dos65) in dependency sources.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[dos65](https://github.com/dos65)'s work in dependency sources.
```

We are still missing some of the interactive features such as:

- hover
- completions
- signature help
- selection range

> An import note to make is that, while we still want to support some more

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An important note to make is that, while we still want to support some more
```
